
===== PAGE 1 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                Sleep Phenomics Automation  (SPA): A  Web  Tool                   
                                                                                  
                     for Sleep Signal Phenotype Extraction                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  Mithun Ganapathy Arun1, Samvrit Rao2, Samuel Waters3,           
                    Niels Turley3, Jiahao Fan4, Licong Cui4, Yue Leng5,           
                        Janet M. Mullington3, Robert J. Thomas6,                  
                          M. Brandon Westover3,7, Haoqi Sun3*                     
                                                                                  
                    1Siebel School of Computer Science, University of Illinois    
                        Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.                  
                       2Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA.             
                 3Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,  
                               Boston, MA 02215, USA.                             
                4University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX
                                   77030, USA.                                    
                 5Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of 
                    California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.      
                6Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Beth Israel
                      Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.            
                   7Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford     
                                                                                  
                           University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.                   
                                                                                  
                  *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hsun3@bidmc.harvard.edu;   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                     Abstract                                     
                 Purpose: Sleep contains rich multi-organ physiology, which can be accessed
                 through polysomnography (PSG). Yet, the quantification of a comprehensive
                 set of phenotypes, which we call sleep phenomics, poses a computational bar-
                 rier for clinicians and researchers interested in education, exploratory analysis,
                 and hypothesis-driven research. Meanwhile, the rapid development of artificial
                 intelligence(AI)andvariousPSGmarkersproposedintheliteraturearefurther
                 widening this barrier.                                           
                 Methods: Here, we propose Sleep Phenomics Automation (SPA), a web-based
                 platform that enables users to upload a sleep recording in the European Data
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       1                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 2 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    Format (EDF), visualize the signals, and download the phenomics in a tabu-
                    lar comma-separated values (CSV) format. The target users are sleep medicine
                    trainees,clinicians,andresearchersinterestedinsleepphenotypesorconducting
                    research.                                                     
                    Results:WeprovidedadescriptionofhowtouseSPA,accompaniedbyscreen-
                    shots. Using SPA, we demonstrated an age-dependent decrease in delta-band
                    power during N3. The first version of SPA includes a small selected set of
                    sleep phenotypes suitable for the adult population that cover both macrostruc-
                    ture (hypnogram and hypnodensity) and microstructures, including Complete
                    AISleepReport,electroencephalography(EEG)spectrogram,EEGbandPower,
                    spindle, slow oscillation, EEG-based brain age, hypoxic burden, self-similarity,
                    and heart rate variability. More phenotypes will be added in later versions.
                    Advanced users proposing new phenotypes can experiment with them on the
                    SPA website and contact SPA to make them available to the public.
                    Conclusion: SPA is for educational and research purposes. It requires zero
                    coding for basic users and provides a centralized, web-based, no-installation
                    interface, lowering the barrier to PSG phenotype extraction, visualization, and
                    reproducible sleep research. SPA is available for non-commercial use at https:
                    //sleep-phenomics-spa.ngrok.app.                              
                    Keywords:Polysomnography,SleepPhenotypes,SignalAnalytics,WebTool
                 Statements and Declarations                                      
                                                                                  
                 HS is a editorial board member of Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. HS is sup-
                 ported by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine Foundation 370-SR-25. MBW
                 is supported by grants from the NIH (R01AG073410, R01HL161253, R01NS126282,
                 R01AG073598,R01NS131347,R01NS130119).MBWisaco-founder,scientificadvisor
                 andconsultanttoBeaconBiosignalsandhasapersonalequityinterestinthecompany.
                 RJTreports:(1)patentandlicencetoMyCardioLLC,forECG-spectrogram;(2)grant
                 support, licence and intellectual property (licensed patents) from DeVilbiss-Drive
                 Healthcare;(3)unlicensedpatentforadeviceregulationCO2duringpositivepressure
                 therapy, for central sleep apnea; (4) patent submitted for respiratory self-similarity
                 for estimation of expressed high loop gain; (5) patent submitted for Enhanced Expi-
                 ratory Rebreathing Space for treatment of high loop gain sleep apnea; (6) general
                 sleep medicine consulting: GLG Councils, Guidepoint Global; (5) Consultant-Jazz
                 Pharmaceuticals.                                                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          2                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 3 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              1 Introduction                                                      
              Polysomnography (PSG) is the clinical gold standard for diagnosing sleep disorders,
              generating rich multi-organ physiological data that includes electroencephalography
              (EEG), electromyography (EMG), electrooculography (EOG), electrocardiography
              (ECG), respiratory signals, and oxygen saturation [1, 2]. PSG signals contain diverse
              phenotypic information that can help reveal physiological processes relevant to neu-
              rodegenerative disorders, cardiovascular disease, metabolic dysfunction [3–6], etc.
              Recent progress made in signal processing and artificial intelligence (AI) for PSG sig-
              nals has enabled the automation of sleep pattern extraction (i.e., feature extraction
              in AI terminology) extraction, sleep staging, and health outcome predictions [7–13].
              However,thebroaderuseoftheseresearchfindingsineducationandresearchhasbeen
              hinderedbyacriticalgap:manyresearchersandclinicianswhogenerateclinicallyrel-
              evant hypotheses often lack the computational expertise to quantify the phenotypes
              and test them, while the tools required to extract phenotypes remain inaccessible to
              non-programmers [14–16].                                            
                SeveralplatformshavebeendevelopedtoaddresstheneedforPSGanalysistools.
              Moonlight is an interactive viewer for polysomnographic (PSG) data built on top
              of the Luna software ecosystem [17]. It supports summary statistics, signal view-
              ing, automated sleep staging, and comprehensive analysis of sleep signals. However,
              extracting each phenotype requires command-line input, which can hinder adoption
              byclinicianswholackspecializedcomputationalorinformaticstraining.LightWAVE,
              available through PhysioNet [18], enables interactive visualization and basic annota-
              tionofsignalsfromPhysioNet’sPhysioBankarchives,butitdoesnotofferautomated
              phenotypeextraction,limitingitsutilityasananalyticalplatform.Altamira,hostedon
              theNationalSleepResearchResource(NSRR)[19,20],offersabasicinteractiveviewer
              without analytical capabilities. YouSleep based on U-sleep [21] provides a web-based
              tool for high-frequency sleep staging, without phenotype extraction functionality.
              Other web-based tools, such as hypoxic burden calculator and Cerebra MY Sleep
              Scoring, have been discontinued. Local software solutions such as Visbrain [22] and
              Lunascope [17] require installation of the software and its dependent software, com-
              plicating accessibility in certain settings. Collectively, these platforms either require
              substantial technical expertise, lack the breadth of clinically relevant phenotypes, or
              function as simple signal viewers that are insufficient to support individual-level phe-
              notypeextraction,whichisessentialfortheirutilityineducation,exploratoryanalysis,
              and reproducible PSG-based research.                                
                Here, we propose Sleep Phenomics Automation (SPA), a user-friendly web-based
              platform designed to democratize access to PSG-derived phenotypes, that addresses
              the limitations of existing tools. SPA provides a centralized, no-installation, upload-
              and-download interface for computing a comprehensive suite of sleep phenotypes
              (i.e., phenomics), including sleep architectural parameters, EEG microstructures,
              ECG patterns, and novel burden metrics. By eliminating the need for programming
              knowledge and offering immediate, downloadable results, SPA enables clinicians and
              researcherstoexplorePSG-derivedphenotypes,supporthypothesisgeneration,educa-
              tion,research,andbetterunderstandhowsleepphysiologyisquantified.Furthermore,
                                       3                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 4 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 SPA is also a platform for disseminating novel sleep phenotypes, ensuring that new
                 phenotypes proposed in the literature are publicly accessible.   
                                                                                  
                 2 Methods                                                        
                                                                                  
                 2.1 Website Design                                               
                 SPAoperatesbyallowinguserstouploadasleeprecordingfileinEuropeanDataFor-
                 mat (EDF) and then download extracted phenotypes in a tabular comma separated
                 values(CSV)format.Thewebapplicationutilizesaserver-renderedarchitecturebuilt
                 on Flask with a glassmorphic UI design implemented through JavaScript and Cas-
                 cading Style Sheets (CSS). Data visualization is primarily handled by Plotly.js for
                 interactive plots. The backend uses MNE [23] for signal processing. An example sleep
                 recordinginEDFformatandanexampleannotationfileinCSVformatareprovided.
                 SPA is licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0 for non-commercial use.       
                 2.2 Implemented Phenotypes                                       
                                                                                  
                 For sleep stages and events, the user has the option to either upload annotation file
                 or run automatic AI analysis, where the latter is implemented by Complete AI Sleep
                 Report (CAISR) [24] for automatic sleep staging, arousal detection, apnea detection,
                 and limb movement detection. The CAISR analytical components, including prepro-
                 cessing, sleep staging, arousal detection, respiratory-event detection, limb-movement
                 detection, and report generation, are packaged in task-specific Docker containers to
                 isolate software dependencies and facilitate reproducible execution. These containers
                 are supported on Linux and, on macOS, through Colima, with x86-64 emulation used
                 for selected legacy CAISR environments on Apple Silicon. Apnea detection includes
                 obstructive,central,andmixedapnea,andhypopnea.CAISRwasdevelopedusingfour
                 diverse and large datasets including 25,749 participants and was externally validated
                 in three datasets annotated by multiple experts. CAISR achieved non-inferiority per-
                 formancecomparedtohumanexpertsbasedoninter-rateragreementinsleepstaging,
                 arousal detection, and limb movement detection in all external datasets, as well as
                 non-inferiorityperformanceinapneadetectionin2/3externaldatasets.Ahypnogram
                 (30-second epochs) and a hypnodensity graph [25] are shown on the SPA webpage
                 after generation. Common sleep architecture parameters (i.e., macrostructure) and
                 apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), arousal index (ArI), hypoxic burden [26], arousal bur-
                 den (AB) [27], and periodic limb movement index (PLMI) are downloadable. When
                 CAISRisusedforautomaticapneadetectionortheuploadedannotationfilecontains
                 apneasubtypes,SPAcomputesobstructiveAHI,centralAHI,mixedAHI,andhypop-
                 nea index during rapid eye movement (REM) stage, Non-REM (NREM) stage, and
                 total sleep time conditions.                                     
                   For EEG-derived phenotypes, there are spectrogram (time-frequency representa-
                 tion) and average band power across sleep stages. The spectrogram is implemented
                 by applying multitaper spectral analysis [28, 29] to 30-second epochs. The spectro-
                 gram is converted into decibel scale with a unit of 10log (µV2/Hz). A spectrogram
                                                   10                             
                                          4                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 5 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              is shown on the SPA webpage after generation. The band powers include delta (1-
              4Hz), theta (4-8Hz), alpha (8-12Hz), sigma (11-15Hz), and beta (12-30Hz). Spindle
              andslowoscillation(SO)aredetectedusingLuna[17].Thespindlephenotypesinclude
              density, frequency, duration, amplitude, and chirp (within-spindle frequency change
              rate). Spindles are detected at each EEG channel, and stratified by fast/slow/all as
              well as SO-coupled/uncoupled. The SO phenotypes include density, amplitude, slope,
              and duration. The spindle-SO coupling phenotypes include their overlap percentage
              and phase angles. For spindle detection quality control, the user can specify the qual-
              ity cutoff (default 1) at the webpage that determines how much the detected spindles
              should stand out from the background. There is also EEG-based brain age (BA) [30]
              for adults. Brain age estimates the age from sleep EEG patterns. A higher brain age
              compared to the chronological age (CA), or a more positive brain age index (BAI =
              BA - CA) indicates accelerated brain aging and is associated with mortality [31] and
              future dementia at the population level [32].                       
                For respiration-oximetry-derived phenotypes, there are hypoxic burden (HB) [26,
              33]andself-similarity[34].Here,weprovidedacustomimplementationofHBaccord-
              ing to the paper which quantifies the area under the desaturation curve for each
              desaturation event [33], combining both depth and duration of oxygen drops. These
              event-specific areas are then summed across the night and normalized to total sleep
              time to yield a burden value. HB measures the cumulative impact of oxygen desat-
              urations during sleep, reflecting the physiological stress of recurrent hypoxemia on
              cardiovascular and metabolic systems. Self-similarity refers to the cyclical repeti-
              tion of waxing-and-waning breathing patterns during sleep, reflecting high loop gain,
              i.e., instability in ventilatory control [34]. It is measured from respiratory inductance
              plethysmography (RIP) signals by detecting central apneas/hypopneas and quanti-
              fying the similarity of consecutive cycles using cross-correlation. A similarity index
              greater than 0.8 indicates strongly repeating cycles, and “full night similarity” is the
              fraction of total sleep time with such high similarity.             
                For ECG-derived phenotypes, we provided heart rate variability (HRV) [35] met-
              rics. The HRV metrics cover time-domain, frequency-domain, andcomplexity-domain
              features,stratifiedbysleepstages.Thereare25metrics,includingmean(nni),sd(nni),
              nni50, pnni50, nni20, pnni20, median(nni), range(nni), cv(nni), rmssd, sdsd, cvsd,
              mean(hr), max(hr), min(hr), std(hr), lf, hf, lfnu, hfnu, lf/hf ratio, vlf, sd1, sd2, and
              sd2/sd1 ratio as implemented in the hrvanalysis Python package.     
                To better inform the users, each phenotype is explained in a separate documen-
              tation webpage after clicking the question mark next to the phenotype name, with
              the following sections: Overview, Output Phenotypes, Clinical Implication (including
              actionable thresholds, if available), Strengths, Limitations, Calculation Method, and
              Reference.                                                          
              2.3 Adding New Phenotypes                                           
              Advanced user can add new phenotypes, especially for authors who publish
              new sleep phenotypes and aim to make them accessible to clinicians and
              researchers. This function requires coding. SPA provides a unified Python function
              get_custom_phenotype()withastandardinputandoutputarguments.Theusercan
                                       5                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 6 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 first provide the implemented function in the text box on the SPA webpage. Once it
                 can run on the example EDF file, the user can contact the maintainers of SPA to add
                 it permanently. The details have been explained in the documentation webpage after
                 clicking the question mark sign. An important direction in future versions is to add
                 phenotypes from pediatric sleep studies.                         
                 2.4 Data Security and Privacy                                    
                                                                                  
                 Users are responsible for ensuring data privacy, including confirming that uploaded
                 sleep recordings and annotation files have been de-identified, a function commonly
                 provided in clinical PSG software. SPA displays a warning message before upload
                 to remind the user of this requirement. Each analysis is performed within a unique,
                 access-restricted job directory containing the uploaded recording and all generated
                 intermediate and output files. File deletion is implemented within strict failure-
                 handling logic and is performed after both successful and failed processing attempts,
                 including parser, signal-processing, subprocess, cancellation, and timeout errors.
                 Cleanup is completed before the analysis is reported as finished. SPA also performs
                 a startup purge of abandoned upload and processing files older than the configured
                 retention period, which is one hour by default, to address files remaining after abrupt
                 server or machine termination. Cleanup operations are restricted to configured SPA
                 storagedirectoriesandareloggedwithoutincludinguploadedfilenames,physiological
                 signals, annotations, or other protected health information.     
                 3 Results                                                        
                                                                                  
                 SPA is available at https://sleep-phenomics-spa.ngrok.app/. After logging in, users
                 can upload signal files in the European Data Format (EDF), which can be exported
                 by many PSG software. Then, the user is taken to a screen where they can map
                 channels from their uploaded EDF file to a standardized list of channel names. If a
                 user is missing a channel or wishes to exclude it, they can select “Does not exist”.
                 After channel mapping, users are directed to a webpage where they can select the
                 phenotypes to compute and see the signals in an interactive viewer (Figure 1). The
                 users then click the “Compute Phenomics” button, and wait for the computation to
                 complete. After completion, the “Compute Phenomics” button becomes “Download
                 Phenomics”. Users can download sleep phenomics in tabular CSV format and the
                 resulting figures are displayed on the webpage (Figure 2).       
                   SPA allows adding new phenotypes (Figure 3), where we have provided detailed
                 documentation with examples. However, we assume users who wants to add new phe-
                 notypes have coding ability. Therefore, the typical users would be researchers who
                 have developed and published new PSG-based markers, and who want to make their
                 phenotype available to the public without coding burden.         
                   To test SPA, an example EDF file was loaded (included in SPA), which has
                 204.2MB with 26 channels and 7.1 hours long. We ran all phenotypes on a machine
                 with Intel(R) Xeon(R) W-2145 CPU 3.70GHz and 128GB of memory. The running
                 time scale is shown in Table 1.                                  
                                                                                  
                                          6                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 7 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                UsingSPA,wecreatedascatterplotofagevs.thedeltabandpower(1-4Hz)during
              N3 at C4-M1 channel in 50 random male participants from the Sleep Heart Health
              Study (SHHS) [36] hosted on National Sleep Research Resource (NSRR) [19, 20] in
              Figure4.Theparticipantswererandomlysampledtospanages40to80yearsold.We
              observedadecreasingtrendwithincreasingage,asexpectedfrompriorliterature[37].
              4 Discussion                                                        
                                                                                  
              SPA represents a practical step to a broader access to PSG-derived phenotypes. SPA
              isfullyweb-basedandrequiresnocodingorinstallation,whichwilllowerthetechnical
              barrierthathaslimitedtheuseofPSG-derivedphenotypesbytrainees,clinicians,and
              researchers. SPA is an educational and research-facing platform that provides access
              to state-of-the-art sleep phenotypes.                               
                The current implementation of SPA does not and will not include all phenotypes,
              as new phenotypes are constantly proposed in the literature. New phenotypes are
              encouraged to be added. For example, PSG-based apnea endotyping holds promise
              to disentangle the heterogeneous nature of sleep apnea, where various PSG-based
              algorithms have been proposed [38–40]; Automated detection of cyclic alternating
              pattern (CAP) [41, 42] will help the clinician understand the patient’s sleep stability
              and fatigue symptoms [43]; EMG-derived phenotypes need to be added, such as sleep
              atonia index (SAI) [44, 45]. SAI reflects the degree of muscle atonia during REM. A
              reducedSAIisindicativeofREMsleepbehaviordisorder(RBD),andcanhelpidentify
              patientsatriskforParkinson’sdisease[46].Importantly,cross-organcouplingmetrics
              are encouraged. For example, ∆HR quantifies the heart rate response to respiratory
              events,reflectingautonomicnervoussystemactivationandstressfromsleep-disordered
              breathing [47]. We also encourage phenotypes targeted at the pediatric population,
              such as sleep staging [48] and brain age [49].                      
                SPA can be used to help users explore and contextualize visual findings from PSG
              recordings. For example, an EEG alpha-delta finding [50] can be confirmed by the
              spectrogram;abenzodiazepinemedicationeffectleadingtoexcessivespindlingcanbe
              confirmed by a strong sigma band in the spectrogram; deep desaturations associated
              with apneic events can be confirmed by elevated hypoxic burden; REM-dominant
              sleep apnea can be confirmed by a higher obstructive AHI than central AHI; and
              Cheyne-Stokes breathing can be confirmed by strong self-similarity metrics.
                SPA can be used for hypothesis generation [51]. For example, a researcher may
              explore whether high respiratory self-similarity values suggest unstable ventilatory
              control patterns in a PSG recording. Follow-up recordings or external datasets could
              then be used to examine whether these patterns are reproducible across individu-
              als or conditions. This approach supports endophenotyping and research hypothesis
              generation,whileclinicalinterpretationortreatmentdecisionisthedownstreamtask.
                SPAhasseverallimitations.(1)SPAisnotdesignedforbatchprocessing,i.e.,pro-
              cessing multiple sleep recordings at once, because the current implementation focuses
              on interactive single-recording exploration, visualization, and phenotype extraction.
              (2)WhileSPAautomatesfeatureextraction,theclinicalinterpretationofsleeppheno-
              types and the determination of actionable thresholds still requires domain expertise.
                                       7                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 8 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 (3) SPA relies on the quality of EDF data provided, meaning that missing or noisy
                 channels can limit the reliability of certain extracted phenotypes. (4) As a web-based
                 platform, although SPA implements warnings for patient privacy data and immedi-
                 ate deletion after analysis, it may still require appropriate institutional approval and
                 secure data handling.                                            
                 Supplement                                                       
                                                                                  
                 Acknowledgment                                                   
                                                                                  
                 The authors would like to thank the Academic & Research Computing services and
                 BILH IT Cyber Security at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, including Justin
                 Turcotte and Stephen J. Berry.                                   
                                                                                  
                 Funding                                                          
                                                                                  
                 HS is supported by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine Foundation 370-
                 SR-25. MBW is supported by grants from the NIH (R01AG073410, R01HL161253,
                 R01NS126282, R01AG073598, R01NS131347, R01NS130119).             
                 Conflict of interest                                             
                                                                                  
                 MBW  is a co-founder, scientific advisor and consultant to Beacon Biosignals and
                 has a personal equity interest in the company. RJT reports: (1) patent and licence
                 to MyCardio LLC, for ECG-spectrogram; (2) grant support, licence and intellectual
                 property(licensedpatents)fromDeVilbiss-DriveHealthcare;(3)unlicensedpatentfor
                 a device regulation CO2 during positive pressure therapy, for central sleep apnea; (4)
                 patent submitted for respiratory self-similarity for estimation of expressed high loop
                 gain; (5) patent submitted for Enhanced Expiratory Rebreathing Space for treatment
                 of high loop gain sleep apnea; (6) general sleep medicine consulting: GLG Councils,
                 Guidepoint Global; (5) Consultant-Jazz Pharmaceuticals.          
                 Data  availability                                               
                                                                                  
                 SPA is available for non-commercial use at https://sleep-phenomics-spa.ngrok.app/.
                                                                                  
                 Code  availability                                               
                                                                                  
                 The   SPA  code  is  hosted at   https://github.com/bdsp-core/   
                 sleep-phenomics-automation.                                      
                                                                                  
                 Author  contribution                                             
                 Conceptualization: HS, MBW, RJT; Data curation: MGA, SR, SW, NT, HS; Formal
                 analysis: MGA, SR, SW; Funding acquisition: HS, MBW; Writing – original draft:
                 MGA, SR, HS; Writing – review & editing: All authors.            
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          8                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 9 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              References                                                          
              [1] Troester,M.M.,Quan,S.F.,Berry,R.B.,SleepMedicine,A.A.,etal.:TheAASM
                 Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and Associated Events: Rules, Terminology and
                 Technical Specifications. American Academy of Sleep Medicine, ??? (2023)
                                                                                  
              [2] Berry, R.B., Budhiraja, R., Gottlieb, D.J., Gozal, D., Iber, C., Kapur, V.K.,
                 Marcus, C.L., Mehra, R., Parthasarathy, S., Quan, S.F., et al.: Rules for scoring
                 respiratory events in sleep: update of the 2007 aasm manual for the scoring of
                 sleepandassociatedevents:deliberationsofthesleepapneadefinitionstaskforce
                 of the american academy of sleep medicine. Journal of clinical sleep medicine
                 8(5), 597–619 (2012)                                             
              [3] Sun, H., Adra, N., Ayub, M.A., Ganglberger, W., Ye, E., Fernandes, M., Paixao,
                 L.,Fan,Z.,Gupta,A.,Ghanta,M.,et al.:Assessingriskofhealthoutcomesfrom
                 brain activity in sleep: a retrospective cohort study. Neurology: Clinical Practice
                 14(1), 200225 (2024)                                             
                                                                                  
              [4] Thapa, R., Kjaer, M.R., He, B., Covert, I., Moore IV, H., Hanif, U., Ganjoo,
                 G., Westover, M.B., Jennum, P., Brink-Kjaer, A., et al.: A multimodal sleep
                 foundation model for disease prediction. Nature Medicine, 1–11 (2026)
              [5] Vallat, R., Shah, V.D., Walker, M.P.: Coordinated human sleeping brainwaves
                 map peripheral body glucose homeostasis. Cell Reports Medicine 4(7) (2023)
                                                                                  
              [6] Zinchuk, A., Yaggi, H.K., Klar, Y., Qin, L., Purcell, S., Bravata, D.M., et al.:
                 Polysomnographic phenotypes and their cardiovascular implications in obstruc-
                 tive sleep apnoea. Thorax 73(5), 472–480 (2017)                  
              [7] Allocca, G., Ma, S., Martelli, D., Cerri, M., Del Vecchio, F., Bastianini, S., Zoc-
                 coli, G., Amici, R., Morairty, S.R., Aulsebrook, A.E., Blackburn, S., Lesku, J.A.,
                 Rattenborg,N.C.,Vyssotski,A.L.,Wams,E.,Porcheret,K.,Wulff,K.,Foster,R.,
                 Chan, J.K.M., Nicholas, C.L., Freestone, D.R., Johnston, L.A., Gundlach, A.L.:
                 Validation of ‘somnivore’, a machine learning algorithm for automated scoring
                 and analysis of polysomnography data. Frontiers in Neuroscience 13, 207 (2019)
                 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.00207                         
                                                                                  
              [8] Rani, S., Gao, E.Y., Ong, J.Z.E., Tan, N.K.W., Ng, A.C.W., Leong, Z.H., Phua,
                 C.Q., Ong, T.H., Leow, L.C., Huang, G.-B., Tan, B.K.J., Toh, S.T.: Multichan-
                 nel machine learning for polysomnographic diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea:
                 a bayesian meta-analysis. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology (2025)
                 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00405-025-09808-9                       
              [9] Bazoukis,G.,Bollepalli,S.C.,Chung,C.T.,Li,X.,Tse,G.,Bartley,B.L.,Batool-
                 Anwar, S., Quan, S.F., Armoundas, A.A.: Application of artificial intelligence in
                 thediagnosisofsleepapnea.JournalofClinicalSleepMedicine19(7),1337–1363
                 (2023) https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.10532                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       9                                          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 10 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 [10] Goldstein, C.A., Berry, R.B., Kent, D.T., Kristo, D.A., Seixas, A.A., Redline,
                    S., Westover, M.B.: Artificial intelligence in sleep medicine: background and
                    implications for clinicians. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 16(4), 609–618
                    (2020)                                                        
                 [11] Sun,H.,Parekh,A.,Thomas,R.J.:Artificialintelligencecandrivesleepmedicine.
                    Sleep Medicine Clinics 20(1), 81–91 (2025)                    
                                                                                  
                 [12] Dean,D.A.,Goldberger,A.L.,Mueller,R.,Kim,M.,Rueschman,M.,Mobley,D.,
                    et al.:Scalingupscientificdiscoveryinsleepmedicine:thenationalsleepresearch
                    resource. Sleep 39(5), 1151–1164 (2016)                       
                 [13] Arun, M.G.: Neurohero: A qeeg and hrv based neural network for explain-
                    able post-anoxic coma prognosis. In: 2024 IEEE MIT Undergraduate Research
                    Technology Conference (URTC), pp. 1–5 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/
                    URTC65039.2024.10937579                                       
                                                                                  
                 [14] Rahman, P., Nandi, A., Hebert, C.: Amplifying domain expertise in clinical
                    data pipelines. JMIR Medical Informatics 8(11), 19612 (2020) https://doi.org/
                    10.2196/19612                                                 
                 [15] Rao, S., Arun, M.G., Thomas, R., Sun, H., Westover, M.B.: Enabling click-
                    and-run access to artificial-intelligence-ready sleep parameters for clinicians and
                    researchers. In: SLEEP, vol. 48, pp. 203–204 (2025). OXFORD UNIV PRESS
                    INC JOURNALS DEPT, 2001 EVANS RD, CARY, NC 27513 USA          
                                                                                  
                 [16] Arun, M., Rao, S., Westover, M., Thomas, R., Sun, H.: Sleep phenomics and
                    annotator: A website tool for individual-level sleep phenotype quantification for
                    clinicians and researchers. Sleep Medicine 138, 108617 (2026) 
                 [17] Purcell, S.M., Manoach, D.S., Demanuele, C., Cade, B.E., Mariani, S., Cox, R.,
                    Panagiotaropoulou, G., Saxena, R., Pan, J.Q., Smoller, J.W., Redline, S., Stick-
                    gold, R.: Characterizing sleep spindles in 11,630 individuals from the national
                    sleepresearchresource.NatureCommunications8,15930(2017)https://doi.org/
                    10.1038/ncomms15930                                           
                                                                                  
                 [18] Goldberger, A.L., Amaral, L.A.N., Glass, L., Hausdorff, J.M., Ivanov, P.C.,
                    Mark, R.G., Mietus, J.E., Moody, G.B., Peng, C.-K., Stanley, H.E.: Phys-
                    ioBank,PhysioToolkit,andPhysioNet:Componentsofanewresearchresourcefor
                    complex physiologic signals. Circulation 101(23), 215–220 (2000 (June 13)). Cir-
                    culation Electronic Pages: http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/23/e215.full
                    PMID:1085218; doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.101.23.e215                 
                 [19] Zhang, G.-Q., Cui, L., Mueller, R., Tao, S., Kim, M., Rueschman, M., Mariani,
                    S., Mobley, D., Redline, S.: The national sleep research resource: towards a sleep
                    datacommons.JournaloftheAmericanMedicalInformaticsAssociation25(10),
                    1351–1358 (2018)                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          10                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 11 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              [20] Zhang, Y., Kim, M., Prerau, M., Mobley, D., Rueschman, M., Sparks, K., Tully,
                 M., Purcell, S., Redline, S.: The national sleep research resource: making data
                 findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable and promoting sleep science. Sleep
                 47(7), 088 (2024)                                                
              [21] Perslev, M., Darkner, S., Kempfner, L., Nikolic, M., Jennum, P.J., Igel, C.: U-
                 sleep:resilienthigh-frequencysleepstaging.NPJdigitalmedicine4(1),72(2021)
                                                                                  
              [22] Combrisson, E., Vallat, R., Eichenlaub, J.-B., O’Reilly, C., Lajnef, T., Guil-
                 lot, A., et al.: Visbrain: A multi-purpose gpu-accelerated open-source suite for
                 multimodalbraindatavisualization.FrontiersinNeuroinformatics13,14(2019)
              [23] Gramfort,A.,Luessi,M.,Larson,E.,Engemann,D.A.,Strohmeier,D.,Brodbeck,
                 C.,Goj,R.,Jas,M.,Brooks,T.,Parkkonen,L.,et al.:Megandeegdataanalysis
                 with mne-python. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 7, 267 (2013)     
                                                                                  
              [24] Nasiri, S., Ganglberger, W., Nassi, T.E., Meulenbrugge, E.-J., Moura Junior,
                 V., Ghanta, M., Gupta, A., Stone, K.L., Kjaer, M.R., Sum-Ping, O., Mignot,
                 E., Hwang, D., Trotti, L.M., Clifford, G.D., Katwa, U., Sun, H., Thomas, R.J.,
                 Westover, M.B.: Caisr: achieving human-level performance in automated sleep
                 analysis across all clinical sleep metrics. Sleep 48(8), 134 (2025) https://doi.org/
                 10.1093/sleep/zsaf134                                            
              [25] Stephansen,J.B.,Olesen,A.N.,Olsen,M.,Ambati,A.,Leary,E.B.,Moore,H.E.,
                 Carrillo, O., Lin, L., Han, F., Yan, H., et al.: Neural network analysis of sleep
                 stagesenablesefficientdiagnosisofnarcolepsy.Naturecommunications9(1),5229
                 (2018)                                                           
                                                                                  
              [26] Azarbarzin, A., Sands, S.A., Stone, K.L., Taranto-Montemurro, L., Messineo, L.,
                 Terrill, P.I., et al.: The hypoxic burden of sleep apnoea predicts cardiovascular
                 disease-related mortality: the osteoporotic fractures in men study and the sleep
                 heart health study. European Heart Journal 40(14), 1149–1157 (2019)
              [27] Shahrbabaki, S.S., Linz, D., Hartmann, S., Redline, S., Baumert, M.: Sleep
                 arousal burden is associated with long-term all-cause and cardiovascular mortal-
                 ity in 8001 community-dwelling older men and women. European heart journal
                 42(21), 2088–2099 (2021)                                         
                                                                                  
              [28] Thomson, D.J.: Spectrum estimation and harmonic analysis. Proceedings of the
                 IEEE 70(9), 1055–1096 (1982)                                     
              [29] Prerau, M.J., Brown, R.E., Bianchi, M.T., Ellenbogen, J.M., Purdon, P.L.: Sleep
                 neurophysiological dynamics through the lens of multitaper spectral analysis.
                 Physiology 32(1), 60–92 (2017)                                   
                                                                                  
              [30] Sun, H., Paixao, L., Oliva, J.T., Goparaju, B., Carvalho, D.Z., Leeuwen, K.G.,
                 Akeju, O., Thomas, R.J., Cash, S.S., Bianchi, M.T., Westover, M.B.: Brain
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       11                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 12 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    age from the electroencephalogram of sleep. Neurobiology of Aging 74, 112–120
                    (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.10.016   
                 [31] Paixao, L., Sikka, P., Sun, H., Jain, A., Hogan, J., Thomas, R., Westover,
                    M.B.: Excess brain age in the sleep electroencephalogram predicts reduced life
                    expectancy. Neurobiology of aging 88, 150–155 (2020)          
                                                                                  
                 [32] Sun, H., Milton, S., Fang, Y., Taha, H.B., Shiju, S., Thomas, R.J., Ganglberger,
                    W.,Pase,M.P.,Hughes,T.,Purcell,S.,et al.:Machinelearning–basedsleepelec-
                    troencephalographicbrainageindexanddementiarisk:anindividualparticipant
                    data meta-analysis. JAMA Network Open 9(3), 261521 (2026)     
                 [33] Esmaeili, N., Labarca,G., Hu, W.-H., Vena,D., Messineo, L., Gell, L., Hajipour,
                    M., Taranto-Montemurro, L., Sands, S.A., Redline, S., et al.: Hypoxic burden
                    based on automatically identified desaturations is associated with adverse health
                    outcomes. Annals of the American Thoracic Society 20(11), 1633–1641 (2023)
                                                                                  
                 [34] Oppersma, E., Ganglberger, W., Sun, H., Thomas, R.J., Westover, M.B.: Algo-
                    rithm for automatic detection of self-similarity and prediction of residual central
                    respiratory events during continuous positive airway pressure. Sleep 44(4), 215
                    (2021) https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsaa215                  
                 [35] Thomas,R.J.,Mietus,J.E.,Peng,C.-K.,Goldberger,A.L.:Anelectrocardiogram-
                    based technique to assess cardiopulmonary coupling during sleep. Sleep 28(9),
                    1151–1161 (2005)                                              
                                                                                  
                 [36] Quan, S.F., Howard, B.V., Iber, C., Kiley, J.P., Nieto, F.J., O’Connor, G.T.,
                    Rapoport, D.M., Redline, S., Robbins, J., Samet, J.M., et al.: The sleep heart
                    health study: design, rationale, and methods. Sleep 20(12), 1077–1085 (1997)
                 [37] Sun, H., Ye, E., Paixao, L., Ganglberger, W., Chu, C.J., Zhang, C., Rosand, J.,
                    Mignot,E.,Cash,S.S.,Gozal,D.,etal.:Thesleepandwakeelectroencephalogram
                    over the lifespan. Neurobiology of aging 124, 60–70 (2023)    
                                                                                  
                 [38] Finnsson,E.,O´lafsd´ottir,G.H.,Loftsd´ottir,D.L.,J´onsson,S.Æ.,Helgad´ottir,H.,
                    Agustsson, J.S., Sands, S.A., Wellman, A.: A scalable method of determining
                    physiologicalendotypesofsleepapneafromapolysomnographicsleepstudy.Sleep
                    44(1), 168 (2021)                                             
                 [39] Dutta,R.,Delaney,G.,Toson,B.,Jordan,A.S.,White,D.P.,Wellman,A.,Eckert,
                    D.J.: A novel model to estimate key obstructive sleep apnea endotypes from
                    standardpolysomnographyandclinicaldataandtheircontributiontoobstructive
                    sleep apnea severity. Annals of the American Thoracic Society 18(4), 656–667
                    (2021)                                                        
                                                                                  
                 [40] Nassi, T., Amidi, Y., Oppersma, E., Donker, D.W., Redeker, N.S., Westover,
                    M.B., Thomas, R.J.: Unraveling sleep apnea dynamics: quantifying loop gain
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          12                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 13 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 using dynamical modeling of ventilatory control. SLEEPJ 49(2), 213 (2026)
                                                                                  
              [41] Parrino,L.,Ferri,R.,Bruni,O.,Terzano,M.G.:Cyclicalternatingpattern(cap):
                 the marker of sleep instability. Sleep medicine reviews 16(1), 27–45 (2012)
              [42] Hartmann, S., Baumert, M.: Automatic a-phase detection of cyclic alternating
                 patterns in sleep using dynamic temporal information. IEEE Transactions on
                 Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 27(9), 1695–1703 (2019)
                                                                                  
              [43] Guilleminault,C.,Lopes,M.C.,Hagen,C.C.,DaRosa,A.:Thecyclicalternating
                 pattern demonstrates increased sleep instability and correlates with fatigue and
                 sleepinessinadultswithupperairwayresistancesyndrome.Sleep30(5),641–647
                 (2007)                                                           
              [44] Ferri, R., Franceschini, C., Zucconi, M., Vandi, S., Poli, F., Bruni, O., Cipolli,
                 C., Montagna, P., Plazzi, G.: Searching for a marker of rem sleep behavior dis-
                 order: submentalis muscle emg amplitude analysis during sleep in patients with
                 narcolepsy/cataplexy. Sleep 31(10), 1409–1417 (2008)             
                                                                                  
              [45] Ferri,R.,Manconi,M.,Plazzi,G.,al.:Improvedcomputationoftheatoniaindex
                 innormalcontrolsandpatientswithremsleepbehaviordisorder.SleepMedicine
                 11(9), 947–949 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2010.06.003
              [46] Sixel-D¨oring, F., Trautmann, E., Mollenhauer, B., Trenkwalder, C.: Associated
                 factors for rem sleep behavior disorder in parkinson disease. Neurology 77(11),
                 1048–1054 (2011)                                                 
                                                                                  
              [47] Azarbarzin, A., Sands, S.A., Younes, M., Taranto-Montemurro, L., Sofer, T.,
                 Vena,D.,Alex,R.M.,Kim,S.-W.,Gottlieb,D.J.,White,D.P.,Redline,S.,Well-
                 man,A.:Thesleepapnea-specificpulse-rateresponsepredictscardiovascularmor-
                 bidityandmortality.AmericanJournalofRespiratoryandCriticalCareMedicine
                 203(12), 1546–1555 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202010-3900OC
              [48] Tripathi, A., Gupta, A., Ganglberger, W., Waters, S., Sun, H., Nasiri, S., Mitra,
                 A.,Stone,K.L.,Mignot,E.,Hwang,D.,etal.:Pediatricsleepnet:adeeplearning
                 network for reliable pediatric sleep staging across developmental stages. Sleep,
                 064 (2026)                                                       
              [49] Iyer, K.K., Staton, S., Collaro, A., Kevat, A., Vanhatalo, S., Roberts, J.A.,
                 Chawla, J., Stevenson, N.J.: Decoding brain age predictions from sleep elec-
                 troencephalographyacrossinfancytoadolescence.ScientificReports15(1),41590
                 (2025)                                                           
                                                                                  
              [50] Manu, P., Lane, T.J., Matthews, D.A., Castriotta, R.J., Watson, R.K., Abeles,
                 M.: Alpha-delta sleep in patients with a chief complaint of chronic fatigue.
                 Southern medical journal 87(4), 465–470 (1994)                   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       13                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 14 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                 [51] Zhu,S.,Reddy,M.,Yen,J.:Hypothesis-drivenstorybuildingframework:Enhanc-
                    ing iterative process support in clinical diagnostic decision support systems. In:
                    AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2009, p. 740 (2009)   
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                          14                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

===== PAGE 15 =====
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
              Tables                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                      Table 1 Runningtimescaleforphenotypescurrentlyimplemented   
                      inSPAforoneexampleEDFfile                                   
                       Operation       Approximate Running Time                   
                       SleepstagingusingCAISR 10minutes                           
                       Spectrogramandbandpower 10seconds                          
                       Spindleandslowoscillation 15minutes                        
                       Brainage              2minutes                             
                       Hypoxicburden         10seconds                            
                       Self-similarity       2minutes                             
                       HeartRateVariability  1minute                              
                       CardiopulmonaryCoupling 1minute                            
                                                                                  
              Figure Captions                                                     
                                                                                  
                   Figure 1. Users can upload a de-identified EDF file or use the example EDF
                         file. The signals are then displayed with full navigation functions.
                         The available phenotypes are provided as check boxes, from which
                         the users can choose.                                    
                   Figure 2. The resulting figures, such as hypnogram, hynodensity, and EEG
                         spectrogram are shown on the webpage.                    
                   Figure 3. SPA allows adding custom phenotype.                  
                   Figure 4. Scatterplotofagevs.deltabandpoweratC4-M1channelduringN3
                         in 50 random male participants from the Sleep Heart Health Study
                         (SHHS).                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                       15                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
